## Shared-Memory, Shared-Disk, and Shared-Nothing Architectures

The simplest way of increasing the hardware resources of a service is to move it to a more powerful machine. Individual CPU cores are no longer getting significantly faster, but you can buy a machine with more CPU cores, more RAM, and more disk space. This approach is called **vertical scaling** or **scaling up**.

You can get parallelism on a single machine by using multiple processes or threads. All the threads belonging to the same process can access the same RAM, and hence this approach is also called a **shared-memory architecture**. The problem with a shared-memory approach is that the cost grows faster than linearly; a high-end machine with twice the hardware resources of a lower-spec machine typically costs significantly more than twice as much. And because of bottlenecks, that machine is unlikely to actually be able to handle twice the load.

Another approach is the **shared-disk architecture**, which uses several machines with independent CPUs and RAM but stores data on an array of disks that is shared among the machines, which are connected via a fast network: network-attached storage (NAS) or a storage area network (SAN). This architecture has traditionally been used for on-premises data warehousing workloads, but contention and the overhead of locking limit the scalability of the shared-disk approach.

By contrast, the **shared-nothing architecture** (also called **horizontal scaling** or **scaling out**) involves a distributed system with multiple nodes, each of which has its own CPUs, RAM, and disks. Any coordination between nodes is done at the software level, via a conventional network. The advantages of this approach are that it has the potential to scale linearly, it can use whatever hardware offers the best price/performance ratio, and it can achieve greater fault tolerance by distributing the system across multiple data centers and regions.
